README.md, before:

# cf-metrics-exporter

A JVM agent to send custom metrics to the cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint.

This also counts the container-to-container traffic and can be used for autoscaling.

The purpose of this agent:
* parse autoscaler endpoint info from VCAP_SERVICES
* collect RPS (Requests Per Second) from the application
* send RPS to cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint 

Sends custom metric with name `custom_throughput` and unit: `rps`.
(Cloud Foundry auto scaler has a `throughput` metric.)

The RPS is calculated as an **average** over the configured interval (default 10 seconds).
So the longer the interval, the fewer peaks in RPS over time are reported.

### Spring Boot RPS

Transform these classes with ByteBuddy on SpringBoot API to count request/reply:

    * org.springframework.web.servlet.DispatcherServlet#handle
    * org.springframework.web.reactive.DispatcherHandler#handle

No need to enable Tomcat MBeans via application settings

Works for all Spring Boot servers:
* Netty (WebFlux/Reactor)
* Tomcat (also with virtual threads)
* Undertow

Use `rspType=spring-request` to enable this feature (default).

### Tomcat RPS

For Tomcat use the JMX MBean and Attribute:
* `Tomcat:type=GlobalRequestProcessor,name="http-nio-8080"` (or similar, depending on your Tomcat configuration)
* `Attribute: requestCount`

Needs explicit application setting: `server.tomcat.mbeanregistry.enabled=true`

Use `rspType=tomcat-mbean` to enable this feature.

### Random RPS

This is a random RPS generator, useful for testing purposes. It generates a random number of requests per second.

Use `rspType=random` to enable this feature.

## Metric Emitters

There are three emitters:
* `CustomMetricsSender`: Sends metrics to the cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint.
* `OtlpRpsExporter`: Sends metrics to an OTLP endpoint.
* `LogEmitter`: Logs metrics to the console.

The `CustomMetricsSender` and `OtlpRpsExporter` are enabled based on the presence of the auto-scaler endpoint and the otlp endpoint 
as defined in the standard environment variables `VCAP_SERVICES` and `MANAGEMENT_OTLP_METRICS_EXPORT_URL`.

The `LogEmitter` is enabled based on the presence of the `enableLogEmitter` setting.

## Agent usage

Copy the jar to the CF container and activate it via the `-javaagent` option.

In the `manifest.yml` file, add the following:

    -javaagent:/path/to/cf-metrics-exporter-<version>.jar

with settings:

    -javaagent:/path/to/cf-metrics-exporter-<version>.jar=debug,rpsType=random,intervalSeconds=5

## Agent Settings

The following settings are available:
- `debug`: Enable debug logging. To enable just add `--debug` without value.
- `trace`: Enable trace logging. To enable just add `--trace` without value.
- `rpsType`: Type of RPS to use. Options are `spring-request` (default), `random`, `tomcat-mbean`.
- `intervalSeconds`: Interval in seconds for sending metrics. Default is 10 seconds. Note: the average RPS is calculated for every interval.
- `metricsEndpoint`: The endpoint to send metrics to. Not used currently, will pick it up from `VCAP_SERVICES`.
- `environmentVarName`: The name of the environment variable to use to extract the value for the environment (e.g `CF_ENVIRONMENT` where for example `CF_ENVIROMENT=test` in the env settings). 
- `enableLogEmitter`: Enable logging of emitted metrics. Default is false. To enable just add `--enableLogEmitter` without value.
- `disableAgent`: Disable the agent completely. Default is false. To disable just add `--disableAgent` without value.

Run with debug enabled to see stacktraces of exceptions.

## Env variables

The following environment variables are used from within the cloud foundry container:
- `VCAP_APPLICATION`
- `VCAP_SERVICES`
- `CF_INSTANCE_INDEX`

The `VCAP_SERVICES` should contain the custom metrics endpoint and basic auth credentials or mTLS endpoint.

There is a `src/test/resources/test.env` file that can be used to set these variables for local testing.
The `src/test/resources/test-missing-basic-auth.env` can be used to test with mTLS instead of basic auth.

Use via `source src/test/resources/test.env` in your terminal or add as env file in the IDE runner.

# Open Telemetry

The agent will send the RPS metric to an Open Telemetry endpoint if the `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set.
It only supports the http protocol and no authentication as of yet. The metric name is `custom_throughput`. The unit is `1/s`.
The attributes are:    
- `cf_application_name`
- `cf_space_name`
- `cf_organization_name`
- `cf_instance_index`
- `environment`

- The `environment` is the value of the system environment as given by the `environmentVarName` variable.


## Build

To build the project, use the following command:

```bash
./mvnw clean package
```

The agent jar will be created in the `target` directory: `target/cf-metrics-exporter-LOCAL-SNAPSHOT.jar`

## Test metrics endpoint

A Wiremock server is included to test the agent. It can be used with basic-auth (port 58080) and mTLS (port 58443).

The certificates for mTLS are generated with the `mtls-certs/mtls-certificate-setup.sh` script.
This script is executed in the compile step of the Maven build.
The certs are in `target/generated-certs`.

Beware: the client private key is not exactly the same as the ones used in cloud foundry,
so parse errors were present when reading the private key on cloud foundry. The bouncy castles
library is currently included for the correct parsing of the client private key. This was 
the error without bouncy castles:

```
Failed to load private client key Caused by: java.security.spec.InvalidKeySpecException: java.security.InvalidKeyException: IOException : algid parse error, not a sequence Caused by: java.security.InvalidKeyException: IOException : algid parse error, not a sequence
```


# Notes

This is a "Beta" release, feedback is welcome!

Commit message:

removed dependency on bouncy castle and the need to register a Java security provider

README.md, after:

# cf-metrics-exporter

A JVM agent to send custom metrics to the cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint.

This also counts the container-to-container traffic and can be used for autoscaling.

The purpose of this agent:
* parse autoscaler endpoint info from VCAP_SERVICES
* collect RPS (Requests Per Second) from the application
* send RPS to cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint 

Sends custom metric with name `custom_throughput` and unit: `rps`.
(Cloud Foundry auto scaler has a `throughput` metric.)

The RPS is calculated as an **average** over the configured interval (default 10 seconds).
So the longer the interval, the fewer peaks in RPS over time are reported.

### Spring Boot RPS

Transform these classes with ByteBuddy on SpringBoot API to count request/reply:

    * org.springframework.web.servlet.DispatcherServlet#handle
    * org.springframework.web.reactive.DispatcherHandler#handle

No need to enable Tomcat MBeans via application settings

Works for all Spring Boot servers:
* Netty (WebFlux/Reactor)
* Tomcat (also with virtual threads)
* Undertow

Use `rspType=spring-request` to enable this feature (default).

### Tomcat RPS

For Tomcat use the JMX MBean and Attribute:
* `Tomcat:type=GlobalRequestProcessor,name="http-nio-8080"` (or similar, depending on your Tomcat configuration)
* `Attribute: requestCount`

Needs explicit application setting: `server.tomcat.mbeanregistry.enabled=true`

Use `rspType=tomcat-mbean` to enable this feature.

### Random RPS

This is a random RPS generator, useful for testing purposes. It generates a random number of requests per second.

Use `rspType=random` to enable this feature.

## Metric Emitters

There are three emitters:
* `CustomMetricsSender`: Sends metrics to the cloud foundry custom metrics endpoint.
* `OtlpRpsExporter`: Sends metrics to an OTLP endpoint.
* `LogEmitter`: Logs metrics to the console.

The `CustomMetricsSender` and `OtlpRpsExporter` are enabled based on the presence of the auto-scaler endpoint and the otlp endpoint 
as defined in the standard environment variables `VCAP_SERVICES` and `MANAGEMENT_OTLP_METRICS_EXPORT_URL`.

The `LogEmitter` is enabled based on the presence of the `enableLogEmitter` setting.

## Agent usage

Copy the jar to the CF container and activate it via the `-javaagent` option.

In the `manifest.yml` file, add the following:

    -javaagent:/path/to/cf-metrics-exporter-<version>.jar

with settings:

    -javaagent:/path/to/cf-metrics-exporter-<version>.jar=debug,rpsType=random,intervalSeconds=5

## Agent Settings

The following settings are available:
- `debug`: Enable debug logging. To enable just add `--debug` without value.
- `trace`: Enable trace logging. To enable just add `--trace` without value.
- `rpsType`: Type of RPS to use. Options are `spring-request` (default), `random`, `tomcat-mbean`.
- `intervalSeconds`: Interval in seconds for sending metrics. Default is 10 seconds. Note: the average RPS is calculated for every interval.
- `metricsEndpoint`: The endpoint to send metrics to. Not used currently, will pick it up from `VCAP_SERVICES`.
- `environmentVarName`: The name of the environment variable to use to extract the value for the environment (e.g `CF_ENVIRONMENT` where for example `CF_ENVIROMENT=test` in the env settings). 
- `enableLogEmitter`: Enable logging of emitted metrics. Default is false. To enable just add `--enableLogEmitter` without value.
- `disableAgent`: Disable the agent completely. Default is false. To disable just add `--disableAgent` without value.

Run with debug enabled to see stacktraces of exceptions.

## Env variables

The following environment variables are used from within the cloud foundry container:
- `VCAP_APPLICATION`
- `VCAP_SERVICES`
- `CF_INSTANCE_INDEX`

The `VCAP_SERVICES` should contain the custom metrics endpoint and basic auth credentials or mTLS endpoint.

There is a `src/test/resources/test.env` file that can be used to set these variables for local testing.
The `src/test/resources/test-missing-basic-auth.env` can be used to test with mTLS instead of basic auth.

Use via `source src/test/resources/test.env` in your terminal or add as env file in the IDE runner.

# Open Telemetry

The agent will send the RPS metric to an Open Telemetry endpoint if the `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set.
It only supports the http protocol and no authentication as of yet. The metric name is `custom_throughput`. The unit is `1/s`.
The attributes are:    
- `cf_application_name`
- `cf_space_name`
- `cf_organization_name`
- `cf_instance_index`
- `environment`

- The `environment` is the value of the system environment as given by the `environmentVarName` variable.

## Build

To build the project, use the following command:

```bash
./mvnw clean package
```

The agent jar will be created in the `target` directory: `target/cf-metrics-exporter-LOCAL-SNAPSHOT.jar`

## Test metrics endpoint

A Wiremock server is included to test the agent. It can be used with basic-auth (port 58080) and mTLS (port 58443).

The certificates for mTLS are generated with the `mtls-certs/mtls-certificate-setup.sh` script.
This script is executed in the compile step of the Maven build.
The certs are in `target/generated-certs`.

Beware: PKCS#1 and PKCS#8 PEM formats are both encountered in practice. This project implements
an minimal pure‑Java parser for unencrypted PKCS#1 ("BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY") keys and uses standard
JCA APIs for PKCS#8 ("BEGIN PRIVATE KEY") keys. No external crypto providers are required.

# Notes

This is a "Beta" release, feedback is welcome!
